Physics 2 - 2015

Write down the Bernoulli’s equation for fluid flow in a pipe and indicate the term which will disappear when the fluid is stopped.

Name the principle on which the continuity equation is based.

Basing on the applications of Bernoulli’s principle, briefly explain why two ships which are moving parallel and close to each other experience an attractive force.

A sphere is dropped under gravity through a fluid of viscosity, nu .  Taking average acceleration as half of the iniital acceleration, show that the time taken to attain terminal velocity is independent of fluid density.

Water is flowing through a horizontal pipe having different cross-sections at two points A and B.  The diameters of the ippe at A and B are 0.6m and 0.2m respectively.   The pressure difference between points A and B is 1m column of water.  Calculate the volume of water flowing per second.

The flow rate of water from a tap of diameter 1.25cm is 3 litres per minute.  The coefficient of viscosity of water is 10E-3 Ns/m^2.  Determine the Reynolds’ number and then state the type of flow of water.

Air is moving fast horizontally past an air-plane.  The speed over the top surface is 60 m/s and under the bottom surface is 45 m/s.  Calculate the difference in pressure.

Define the following terms:
(i) Damped oscillations
(ii) Forced oscillations
(iii) Resonance

What is meant by Doppler effect?
Write down three uses of Doppler effect.

A source of sound emits waves of frequency, f, and is moving with a speed of u_s towards the listener and away from the listener.  Derive an expression for apparent frequency f_a of sound in each case if the velocity of sound wave in air is V.  

A whistle emitting a sound of frequency 440Hz is tied to a string of 1.5m length and rotated with an angular velocity of 20 rad/s in the horizontal plane.  Calculate the range of frequencies heard by an observer stationed at a large distance.

A police on duty detects a drop of a 10% in the pitch of the horn of a motor car as it crosses him. Calculate the speed of the car.

What is meant by the statement that light is plane polarized.

State Brewster’s law.

Sunlight is reflected from a calm lake.  The reflected sunlight is totally polarized.  What is the angle between the sun and the horizon.

State four conditions for sustained interference of light.

In a Young’s double slit experiment the interval between the slits is 0.2mm.  For the light of wavelength 6.0x10E-7 m, Find the distance of the second dark fringe from the central fringe.

Distinguish between diffraction and diffraction grating.

A parallel beam of the monochromatic light is incident normally on a diffraction grating.  The angle between the two first-order spectra on either side of the normal is 30 degrees.  Assume that the wavelength of the light is 5893x10E14 m; find the number of ruling per mm on the grating and the greatest number of bright images obtained. 

Define the following materials as classified on the basis of elastic properties:
(I)  Ductile materials 
(ii) Brittle materials
(iii) Elastomers

Briefly explain why the stretching of a coil spring is determined by its shear modulus.

A copper wire of negligible mass, 1m long and cross-sectional area 10E-5 m^2 is kept on a smooth horizontal table with one end fixed.  A ball of 1kg is attached to the other end.  The wire and the ball are rotating with an angular velocity of 35 rad/s.  If the elongation of the wire is 10E-3 m, find Young’s modulus of wire.  If on increasing the angular velocity to 100 rad/s, the wire breaks down, find the breaking stress.

Differentiate bulk modulus from shear modulus.

Two wires, one of steel and one of phosphor bronze each 1.5m long and 2mm diameter are joined end to end as a composite wire of length 3cm.  What tension in the composite wire will produce total extension of 0.064cm?

Differentiate electric potential from electric potential difference.

Sketch a graph of variation of electrical potential from the centre of a hollow charged conducting sphere of radius, r, up to infinity.  Explain the shape of the graph.

Two bodies A and B are 0.1m apart.  A point charge of 3x10E-3 mu C is placed at A and a point charge of 1x10E-9 mu C is placed at B.  C is the point on the straight line between A and B, where the electric potential is zero.  Calculate the distance between A and C.

A square ABCD has each side of 100cm.  Four points charges of +0.04 mu C, -0.05 mu C, +0.06 mu C, and +0.05 mu C are placed at A, B, C, and D respectively.  Calculate the electric potential at the centre of the square.

What do you understand by dielectric constant?

When are the capacitors said to be connected in parallel?

The parallel plate capacitor consisting of two metal plates each of area 20cm^2 placed at 1cm apart are connected to the terminals of an electrostatic voltmeter.  The system is charged to give a reading of 120V on the voltmeter scale.  When the space between the plates is filled with a glass of dielectric constant of 5, the voltmeter reading falls to 50V.  What is the capacitance of the voltmeter?  You may assume that volutage recorded by a voltmeter is directly proportional to the scale reading.

A 4.0 mu F capacitor is charged by 12V supply and is then discharged through 1.5 M ohms resistor.  
(i) Obtain the time constant.
(ii) Calculate the charge on the capacitor at the start of the discharge.
(iii) What will the value of the charge on the capacitor, the potential difference across the capacitor and the current in the circuit be 2 seconds after the discharge starts?

Distinguish between self-inductance and mutual inductance.

A horizontal straight wire 0.05m long weighing 2.4g/m is placed perpendicular to a uniform horizontal magnetic field of flux density 0.8T.  If the resistance of the wire is 7.6 ohms /m, calculate the potential difference that has to be applied between the ends of the wire to make it just self-supporting.

Two very long wires made of copper and of equal lengths are placed parallel to each other in such a way that they are 10cm apart.  If the total power dissipated in the two wires is 75W, find the force between them if the resistivity of the copper wire is 1.69x10E-8 ohm m and of diameter 2mm.

Explain the statement that, a sinusoidal current, of peak value 5A passed through an a.c. ammeter reads 5/sqrt{2} A.  

Show that the average power transferred to an a.c. circuit is, in general, given by E I R/Z, where R is the resistance in the circuit defined to be the real part of complex impedance and Z is its impedance.

A coil which has an inductance of 0.2H and negligible resistance is in series in a resistor, whose resistance is 60 ohms . The pair is connected across a 50V supply alternating at 100/ pi Hz.  Calculate the toal impedance of the circuit and its power factor.

Show that the de Broglie hypothesis of matter wave are in agreement with Bohr’s theory.

A 10kg satellite circles the Earth once every 2 hours in an orbit having a radius of 8000km.  Assuming Bohr’s angular momentum postulate applies to the satellite just as it does to an electron in the hydrogen atom; find the quantum number of the orbit of the satellite.

A muon is a particle which has the same change as an electron but its mass is 207 times the mass of an electron.  An unusual atom similar to a hydrogen has been created consisting of a muon orbiting a single proton.  An energy level diagram for this atom is shown in the figure below.
### Insert image below ###
(i) Determine the ionization energy of this atom in joules.
(ii) Calculate the maximum possible wavelength of a proton which when absorbed will be able to ionize this atom.
(iii) Calculate the de-Broglie wavelength of muon traveling at 11% of the speed of light.

Why are the energy levels labelled with negative energies?

Ultraviolet light of wavelength 3600x10E-10 m is made to fall on a smooth surface of potassium. Determine:
(I) The maximum energy of emitted photoelectrons
(ii) The stopping potential.
(iii) The velocity of the most energetic photoelectrons given that work function for potassium is 2eV.

Define activity and half-life.

Give any four uses of LASER lgith.

The isotope ### Insert special characters ### with a half-life of 1.37x10E9 years decays to ### Insert special characters ###, which is stable.  Moon rocks from the sea of tranquility show that the ratio of these potassium atoms to argon atoms is 1/7.  Determine the age of the moon rock.

The half-life of radioactive substance is 1 hour.  How long will it take for 60% of the substance to decay?

What is a nuclear reactor?
Briefly explain any three main components in a nuclear reactor.

Sketch the binding energy curve.
State any two conclusions that can be drawn from the curve above.

If the mass of deuterium nucleus is 2.015 a.m.u, that of one isotope of helium is 3.017 a.m.u. and that of neutron is 1.009 a.m.u., calculate the energy released by the fusion of 1kg of deuterium. 
Suppose 50% of this energy was used to produce 1 MW of electricity, for how many days would be able to function.
